MKTME-Provided Mitigations
==========================

MKTME adds a few mitigations against attacks that are not
mitigated when using TME alone.  The first set are mitigations
against software attacks that are familiar today:

 * Kernel Mapping Attacks: information disclosures that leverage
   the kernel direct map are mitigated against disclosing user
   data.
 * Freed Data Leak Attacks: removing an encryption key from the
   hardware mitigates future user information disclosure.

The next set are attacks that depend on specialized hardware,
such as an “evil DIMM” or a DDR interposer:

 * Cross-Domain Replay Attack: data is captured from one domain
(guest) and replayed to another at a later time.
 * Cross-Domain Capture and Delayed Compare Attack: data is
   captured and later analyzed to discover secrets.
 * Key Wear-out Attack: data is captured and analyzed in order
   to Weaken the AES encryption itself.

More details on these attacks are below.

Kernel Mapping Attacks
----------------------
Information disclosure vulnerabilities leverage the kernel direct
map because many vulnerabilities involve manipulation of kernel
data structures (examples: CVE-2017-7277, CVE-2017-9605).  We
normally think of these bugs as leaking valuable *kernel* data,
but they can leak application data when application pages are
recycled for kernel use.

With this MKTME implementation, there is a direct map created for
each MKTME KeyID which is used whenever the kernel needs to
access plaintext.  But, all kernel data structures are accessed
via the direct map for KeyID-0.  Thus, memory reads which are not
coordinated with the KeyID get garbage (for example, accessing
KeyID-4 data with the KeyID-0 mapping).

This means that if sensitive data encrypted using MKTME is leaked
via the KeyID-0 direct map, ciphertext decrypted with the wrong
key will be disclosed.  To disclose plaintext, an attacker must
“pivot” to the correct direct mapping, which is non-trivial
because there are no kernel data structures in the KeyID!=0
direct mapping.

Freed Data Leak Attack
----------------------
The kernel has a history of bugs around uninitialized data.
Usually, we think of these bugs as leaking sensitive kernel data,
but they can also be used to leak application secrets.

MKTME can help mitigate the case where application secrets are
leaked:

 * App (or VM) places a secret in a page * App exits or frees
memory to kernel allocator * Page added to allocator free list *
Attacker reallocates page to a purpose where it can read the page

Now, imagine MKTME was in use on the memory being leaked.  The
data can only be leaked as long as the key is programmed in the
hardware.  If the key is de-programmed, like after all pages are
freed after a guest is shut down, any future reads will just see
ciphertext.

Basically, the key is a convenient choke-point: you can be more
confident that data encrypted with it is inaccessible once the
key is removed.

Cross-Domain Replay Attack
--------------------------
MKTME mitigates cross-domain replay attacks where an attacker
replaces an encrypted block owned by one domain with a block
owned by another domain.  MKTME does not prevent this replacement
from occurring, but it does mitigate plaintext from being
disclosed if the domains use different keys.

With TME, the attack could be executed by:
 * A victim places secret in memory, at a given physical address.
   Note: AES-XTS is what restricts the attack to being performed
   at a single physical address instead of across different
   physical addresses
 * Attacker captures victim secret’s ciphertext * Later on, after
   victim frees the physical address, attacker gains ownership 
 * Attacker puts the ciphertext at the address and get the secret
   plaintext

But, due to the presumably different keys used by the attacker
and the victim, the attacker can not successfully decrypt old
ciphertext.

Cross-Domain Capture and Delayed Compare Attack
-----------------------------------------------
This is also referred to as a kind of dictionary attack.

Similarly, MKTME protects against cross-domain capture-and-compare
attacks.  Consider the following scenario:
 * A victim places a secret in memory, at a known physical address
 * Attacker captures victim’s ciphertext
 * Attacker gains control of the target physical address, perhaps
   after the victim’s VM is shut down or its memory reclaimed.
 * Attacker computes and writes many possible plaintexts until new
   ciphertext matches content captured previously.

Secrets which have low (plaintext) entropy are more vulnerable to
this attack because they reduce the number of possible plaintexts
an attacker has to compute and write.

The attack will not work if attacker and victim uses different
keys.

Key Wear-out Attack
-------------------
Repeated use of an encryption key might be used by an attacker to
infer information about the key or the plaintext, weakening the
encryption.  The higher the bandwidth of the encryption engine,
the more vulnerable the key is to wear-out.  The MKTME memory
encryption hardware works at the speed of the memory bus, which
has high bandwidth.

Such a weakness has been demonstrated[1] on a theoretical cipher
with similar properties as AES-XTS.

An attack would take the following steps:
 * Victim system is using TME with AES-XTS-128
 * Attacker repeatedly captures ciphertext/plaintext pairs (can
   be Performed with online hardware attack like an interposer).
 * Attacker compels repeated use of the key under attack for a
   sustained time period without a system reboot[2].
 * Attacker discovers a cipertext collision (two plaintexts
   translating to the same ciphertext)
 * Attacker can induce controlled modifications to the targeted
   plaintext by modifying the colliding ciphertext

MKTME mitigates key wear-out in two ways:
 * Keys can be rotated periodically to mitigate wear-out.  Since
   TME keys are generated at boot, rotation of TME keys requires a
   reboot.  In contrast, MKTME allows rotation while the system is
   booted.  An application could implement a policy to rotate keys
   at a frequency which is not feasible to attack.
 * In the case that MKTME is used to encrypt two guests’ memory
   with two different keys, an attack on one guest’s key would not
   weaken the key used in the second guest.

--
1. http://web.cs.ucdavis.edu/~rogaway/papers/offsets.pdf
2. This sustained time required for an attack could vary from days
   to years depending on the attacker’s goals.
